Draft post for EngSys 2020-08-11 (#1602)
Azure/azure-sdk: _posts/2020-08-11-packaging-tools-and-repositories.md

---
title: Azure SDK: Packaging, tools, and repository structure
layout: post
date: 2020-08-11
sidebar: releases_sidebar
author_github: mitchdenny
repository: azure/azure-sdk
---

Back in March 2020 (seems so long ago doesn't it!) we posted about [how we structured the Azure SDK repositories](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/azure-sdk/building-the-azure-sdk-repository-structure/). We compared some of the implications of mono-repo vs. micro-repo decisions when it comes to hosting our SDKs and outlined some of the key considerations for choosing between the two.

> One of the factors in the decision was the level of tool chain support for our nominated approach.

Reviewer: Instead of nominated, do we want to say "selected"?

The quick version of that article is that we wanted to create a single place where developers and contributors could work together on a particular language or ecosystems version of the SDK. One of the factors in the decision was the level of tool chain support for our selected approach. For the most part we've managed to navigate the various trade-offs associated with choosing a mono-repository structure while still being able to ship various components of the SDK independently.

This is enabled in large part due to the fact that for many of our repositories (.NET, Java, JavaScript, and Python), the artifact we ship is a bundle of source/binaries which are consumed independently of where we host our source code. This means that its possible to have two libraries with interdependencies in the repo, but the dependent library can use the published version of the package whilst the new version continues to evolve (this is called binary composition - which the blog post linked above covers in a bit more detail).

But what about ecosystems where there is a significant relationship between the source repo and the method of consuming our SDK?

## Package delivery systems

> When developers consume third-party dependencies they need a way of hooking them into their builds at the right time. Really a package delivery system is just a convention that is agreed to by developers in a particular ecosystem which makes it easy to consume third-party code. In .NET for example, the unit of code reuse is an assembly (typically a DLL file), and a NuGet package is just a zip file containing that DLL for any target runtime versions that the package supports, as well as other meta data which describes that packages own dependencies. When you install it walks the graph of all dependencies downloading each file in turn. The ```*.csproj``` file contains a list of packages that project depends on so that when you build its got somewhere to start looking for all the dependencies. Once all the DLL files are downloaded into the cache, the compiler is invoked with a pointer to these dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developers consume third-party dependencies they need a way of hooking them into their builds at the right time. Really a package delivery system is just a convention that is agreed to by developers in a particular ecosystem which makes it easy to consume third-party code. In .NET for example, the unit of code reuse is an assembly (typically a DLL file), and a NuGet package is just a zip file containing that DLL for any target runtime versions that the package supports, as well as other metadata which describes that packages own dependencies. When you install the package it walks the graph of all dependencies and downloads each file in turn. The ```*.csproj``` file contains a list of packages that project depends on so that when you build it has somewhere to start looking for all the dependencies. Once all the DLL files are downloaded into the cache, the compiler is invoked with a pointer to these dependencies.
```

Source-based composition of dependencies is a common feature of ecosystems that produce native binaries where there tends to be less introspection capabilities at runtime.

### Repository as package

Language/platform designers today can't ignore the importance of having a simple and streamlined code reuse experience. It isn't surprising then when we look at languages like Swift and Go that they have made early efforts to formalize what it means to create reusable code.

The difference with these ecosystems when compared to .NET, Java, JavaScript, and Python is that they've opted to strongly tie the definition of a package to the source repository that hosts it.

* Swift Package Manager looks for a ```Package.swift``` file in the root of a Git repository and versions are targeted by Git ref.

![Swift Package Structure](/images/posts/swift-package-structure.PNG)

* Go uses a ```Go.mod``` file to define a module and delcare its dependencies. Once again, the Git ref is used as the version specifier.

![Go Package Structure](/images/posts/go-package-structure.PNG)

#### Repository as package has nice OSS characteristics

> Source-based packages where the repository is used as a discovery and distribution mechanism makes it very easy for a consumer of your package to fork your repository on GitHub make some local changes on a branch and consume it within their own solution whilst they wait for their changes to be upstreamed (or not).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Source-based packages where the repository is used as a discovery and distribution mechanism makes it very easy for a consumer of your package to fork your repository on GitHub, make some local changes on a branch, and consume it within their own solution whilst they wait for their changes to be upstreamed (or not).
```

When building a set of APIs like we have in the SDK we need to carefully consider whether the requirement to ship the entire SDK at once vs. piecemeal is a blocker, and then depending on the packaging tool chain, that will have impacts on the way we structure our repositories.

In the case of our Swift SDKs we've opted to stick with the mono-repository approach to create a focal point for reporting issues and community contributions.

Go's deep linking capability allows us to operate as a mono-repository but also ship module updates independently.

This is an example of where tool chain support has major implications for how you structure your repository and at what level of granularity you can release components to customers.

## Use the tools that are idiomatic to the language and use them as intended

When it comes to building solutions I am a big proponent of the [principle of least astonishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment). Applied to the engineering systems for the Azure SDK, that means trying not the fight the tools that support the ecosystem that you are targetting.

> For package managers this means understanding the relationship that package format, discovery, distribution and cardinality have on the way that you structure your repository and the surrounding build and release systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For package managers this means understanding the relationship that package format, discovery, distribution, and cardinality have on the way that you structure your repository and the surrounding build and release systems.
```

> The table below is my quick survey of some ecosystems and how they map to package format, discovery, distribution, and cardinality (whether the one repo can host sources for multiple packages):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below is a survey of some ecosystems and how they map to package format, discovery, distribution, and cardinality (whether the one repo can host sources for multiple packages):
```

|Ecosystem|Package format|Package discovery|Package distribution|Package cardinality
|--|--|--|--|--|
|.NET|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many
|Java|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many
|JavaScript|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)
|Python|Source<sup>1</sup>|Registry<sup>1</sup>|Registry<sup>1</sup>|1:Many
|Swift|Source<sup>2</sup>|Repository|Repository|1:1<sup>3</sup>
|Go|Source|Repository|Repository|1:Many
|Rust|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)

> ### Notes
> 1. Python also supports binary distribution in the form of wheel packages, and source distribution can come directly from the version control system.
>

> > 2. Swift Package Manager recently added support for wrapping binary frameworks (*.xcframework archives) in a package. The Swift Package meta-data in the ```Package.swift``` file still needs to be hosted in a repository, but the package itself can be a binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. Swift Package Manager recently added support for wrapping binary frameworks (*.xcframework archives) in a package. The Swift Package metadata in the ```Package.swift``` file still needs to be hosted in a repository, but the package itself can be a binary.
```

>
> 3. Whilst Swift Packager Manager only supports one package per repository, a single package can define multiple _Products_ which allow you to control which parts of the code is built.

With .NET for example, it is quite normal to have a single repository produce multiple packages because each package exists independently of the repository which contains its sources.

If we tried to do the same thing with Swift by comparison we'd frequently be fighting against the Swift tool chain.

In the JavaScript community, NPM packages are generally one package per repository, but the fact that package discovery and distribution is handled by the registry means that we can get away with breaking that convention in the interests of keeping a single place for developers to report issues and make contributions.

## Conclusion

> As we build out the SDK for each language/ecosystem we are constantly striving to maintain a balance the productivity of the developers building the SDK and the experience of the developers consuming the SDK. The tool chains in each ecosystem influence much of how our engineering system works and the decisions we make about structuring and releasing the SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we build out the SDK for each language/ecosystem we are constantly striving to maintain a balance of the productivity of the developers building the SDK and the experience of the developers consuming the SDK. The tool chains in each ecosystem influence much of how our engineering system works and the decisions we make about structuring and releasing the SDK.
```

---
title: Packaging tools &amp; repositories
layout: post
date: 2020-08-11
sidebar: releases_sidebar
author_github: mitchdenny
repository: azure/azure-sdk
---

Back in March 2020 (seems so long ago doesn't it!) we posted about [how we structured the Azure SDK repositories](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/azure-sdk/building-the-azure-sdk-repository-structure/). We compared some of the implications of mono-repo vs. micro-repo decisions when it comes to hosting our SDKs and outlined some of the key considerations for choosing between the two.

> One of the factors in the decision was the level of tool chain support for your nominated approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the factors in the decision was the level of tool chain support for our nominated approach.
```

Author: Thanks.

> For the most part we've managed to navigate the various trade-offs associated with choosing a mono-repository structure and still be able to ship various components of the SDK independently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the most part we've managed to navigate the various trade-offs associated with choosing a mono-repository structure while still being able to ship various components of the SDK independently.
```

Author: Thanks. Integrated into an upcoming commit.

This is enabled in large part due to the fact that for many of our repositories (.NET, Java, JavaScript, and Python), the artifact we ship is a bundle of source/binaries which are consumed independently of where we host our source code. In short, if we can script a way to produce the artifacts we can ship them however we want!

But what about ecosystems where there is a significant relationship between the source repo and the method of consuming our SDK?

## Consuming via source

> In ecosystems where there is no defacto standard for packaging developers are left to come up with their own solutions for sharing code. In C, C++, and Objective-C codebases for example it is not uncommon to see developers using Git sub-modules or vendoring in entire snapshots of third party libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In ecosystems where there is no defacto standard for packaging, developers are left to come up with their own solutions for sharing code. In C, C++, and Objective-C codebases for example it is not uncommon to see developers using Git sub-modules or vendoring in entire snapshots of third party libraries.
```

Author: Integrated into an upcoming commit.

Like everything though there is a downside. In both Swift and Go, the model for _repository as package_ is strictly one package per repository. This means that if you are tied to the monolithic repository model then you are going to have a monolithic package.

When building a set of APIs like we have in the SDK we need to carefully consider whether the requirement to ship the entire SDK at once vs. piecemeal is a blocker, and then depending on the packaging tool chain, that will have impacts on the way we structure our repositories.

In the case of our Swift and Go SDKs we've opted to stick with the mono-repository approach to create a focal point for reporting issues and community contributions.

This is an example of where tool chain support has major implications for how you structure your repository and at what level of granularity you can release components to customers.

> ## Knowing when your fighting the tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Knowing when you're fighting the tools
```

Author: Thanks.

When it comes to building solutions I am a big proponent of the [principle of least astonishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment). Applied to the engineering systems for the Azure SDK, that means trying not the fight the tools that support the ecosystem that you are targetting.

For package managers this means understanding the relationship that package format, discovery, distribution and cardinality have on the way that you structure your repository and the surrounding build and release systems.

The table below is my quick survey of some ecosystems and how they map:

|Ecosystem|Package format|Package discovery|Package distribution|Package cardinality
|--|--|--|--|--|
|.NET|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many

> |Python|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many

Reviewer 3: Not sure it is worth calling out but I know python is also sometimes consumed via source in the repository (see https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/pip_install/#vcs-support) you can also specify a directory so you could host multiple packages in a repo still.

Reviewer 2: Also, Python wheels are binary distributions so it's actually both.

Author: Good points both.

|JavaScript|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)
|Java|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many
|Go|Source|Repository|Repository|1:1

> |Swift|Source|Repository|Repository|1:1

Reviewer 2: 1:1 is technically right, but a package may have multiple products and the developer can consume whatever subset they want of those products. But the entire repo still has to be downloaded.

Author: Added foot notes on this.

|Rust|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)

> For .NET example it is quite normal to have a single repository produce multiple packages, and because each package exists independently of the repository contains its sources.

Reviewer 3: "With .NET for example, it is quite normal to have a single repository produce multiple packages because each package exists independently of the repository which contains its sources."

Author: Thanks!

If we tried to do the same thing with Swift by comparison we'd frequently be fighting against the Swift tool chain.

> In the JavaScript community, NPM packages are generally one package per repository, but the fact that package discovery and distribution is handled by the registry means that we can get away with breaking that convention in the interests of keeping a single place for developers to report issues and make contributions.

Reviewer 3: I was looking for a conclusion section.

Author: Just added one in! I was struggling to tie together a bunch of random thoughts in this space. Normally when I write posts for my own blog I don't start out "with a point to make" but rather just use it a way as serializing some thoughts with a hope to actually find my conclusion.

---
title: Packaging tools &amp; repositories
layout: post
date: 2020-08-11
sidebar: releases_sidebar
author_github: mitchdenny
repository: azure/azure-sdk
---

> Back in March 2020 (seems so long ago doesn't it!) we posted about [how we structured the Azure SDK repositories](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/azure-sdk/building-the-azure-sdk-repository-structure/). We compared some of the implications of mono-repo vs. micro-repo decisions when it comes to hosting our SDKs and outlined some of the key considerations for choosing between the two.

Reviewer: You might want to include that we use mono-repo.

> Back in March 2020 (seems so long ago doesn't it!) we posted about [how we structured the Azure SDK repositories](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/azure-sdk/building-the-azure-sdk-repository-structure/). We compared some of the implications of mono-repo vs. micro-repo decisions when it comes to hosting our SDKs and outlined some of the key considerations for choosing between the two.

Reviewer: In general, I think there's good info here, but I would make it more consumable for the glancers.  Like

Here's the situation:
Here's the problem with that:
Here's how we solved it:

Author: Addressed this by inserting a sentence which pulls this together a bit. Trying to avoid being too verbose.

> One of the factors in the decision was the level of tool chain support for our nominated approach.

Reviewer: I need more in this paragraph. It's easily skimmable. An example might help.

For the most part we've managed to navigate the various trade-offs associated with choosing a mono-repository structure while still being able to ship various components of the SDK independently.

This is enabled in large part due to the fact that for many of our repositories (.NET, Java, JavaScript, and Python), the artifact we ship is a bundle of source/binaries which are consumed independently of where we host our source code. In short, if we can script a way to produce the artifacts we can ship them however we want!

> But what about ecosystems where there is a significant relationship between the source repo and the method of consuming our SDK?

Reviewer: I'd have a quick intro, like "there are generally two approaches, consuming via source and consuming via package" or whatever you think makes sense here.  But lead the reader to the next paragraph.

> ## Consuming via source

Reviewer: Throughout this post, I would like to see more images.  Screen shots of what you are talking about.

> In ecosystems where there is no defacto standard for packaging, developers are left to come up with their own solutions for sharing code. In C, C++, and Objective-C codebases for example it is not uncommon to see developers using Git sub-modules or vendoring in entire snapshots of third party libraries.

Author: Changed the term. I didn't see a good resource to describe vendoring (e.g. no wikipedia page).

Recently in the C++ community we've seen more efforts to formulate a standard approach to code-reuse. A good example is [vcpkg](https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg). In the iOS community we see solutions like [CocoaPods](https://cocoapods.org/).

The general approach that these package managers take is that they allow you to express your dependencies and then the tooling takes care of pulling the appropriate version of the source and presenting it to your chosen build system for integration into your solution.

Source-based composition of dependencies is a common feature of ecosystems that produce native binaries where there tends to be less introspection capabilities at runtime.

> ## Repository as package

Reviewer: I feel like we are missing the obvious, Package delivery systems section.  Seems like we assume the reader knows how packages are delivered. Don't need to include a lot, but set a base-line.

Language/platform designers today can't ignore the importance of having a simple and streamlined code reuse experience. It isn't surprising then when we look at languages like Swift and Go that they have made early efforts to formalize what it means to create reusable code.

> What is different about these ecosystems when compared to .NET, Python, JavaScript and Java is that they've opted to strongly tie the definition of a package to the source repository that hosts it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is different about these ecosystems when compared to .NET, Python, JavaScript, and Java is that they've opted to strongly tie the definition of a package to the source repository that hosts it.
```

> In Swift for example; Swift Package Manager generally points to dependencies via a URL to a Git repository with a ref specifying the branch/tag/commit being depended on. You won't find a version specifier in the ```Package.swift``` within that repository, that is a function of the Git ref.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the Swift Package Manager generally points to dependencies via a URL to a Git repository with a ref specifying the branch/tag/commit being depended on. You won't find a version specifier in the ```Package.swift``` within that repository, that is a function of the Git ref.
```

> The approach that Go takes is so similar that it isn't worth delving into it in more detail other than to say that both Go and Swift have a very strong notion of the repository and the package being one and the same thing.

Reviewer: I feel like these next couple of paragraphs can be refactored/organized into succient points, maybe use some formatting to help make the points.

Like everything though there is a downside. In both Swift and Go, the model for _repository as package_ is strictly one package per repository. This means that if you are tied to the monolithic repository model then you are going to have a monolithic package.

When building a set of APIs like we have in the SDK we need to carefully consider whether the requirement to ship the entire SDK at once vs. piecemeal is a blocker, and then depending on the packaging tool chain, that will have impacts on the way we structure our repositories.

In the case of our Swift and Go SDKs we've opted to stick with the mono-repository approach to create a focal point for reporting issues and community contributions.

This is an example of where tool chain support has major implications for how you structure your repository and at what level of granularity you can release components to customers.

> ## Knowing when you're fighting the tools

Reviewer: Maybe turn this into a positive statement, long-winded, but... "Use the tools that are idiomatic to the language and use them as intended."

When it comes to building solutions I am a big proponent of the [principle of least astonishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment). Applied to the engineering systems for the Azure SDK, that means trying not the fight the tools that support the ecosystem that you are targetting.

For package managers this means understanding the relationship that package format, discovery, distribution and cardinality have on the way that you structure your repository and the surrounding build and release systems.

> The table below is my quick survey of some ecosystems and how they map:

Reviewer: ...how they map to what?

|Ecosystem|Package format|Package discovery|Package distribution|Package cardinality
|--|--|--|--|--|
|.NET|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many
|Python|Source<sup>1</sup>|Registry<sup>1</sup>|Registry<sup>1</sup>|1:Many
|JavaScript|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)
|Java|Binary|Registry|Registry|1:Many
|Go|Source|Repository|Repository|1:1
|Swift|Source<sup>2</sup>|Repository|Repository|1:1<sup>3</sup>
|Rust|Source|Registry|Registry|1:Many (1:1 by convention)

With .NET for example, it is quite normal to have a single repository produce multiple packages because each package exists independently of the repository which contains its sources.

If we tried to do the same thing with Swift by comparison we'd frequently be fighting against the Swift tool chain.

> In the JavaScript community, NPM packages are generally one package per repository, but the fact that package discovery and distribution is handled by the registry means that we can get away with breaking that convention in the interests of keeping a single place for developers to report issues and make contributions.

Reviewer: Include the comment about the benefits of reporting issues and contributions in the opener of this post.

## Conclusions

The capabilities and constraints of the package management tool chain used by a particular ecosystem can have a dramatic impact on how you structure your repositories and whether you ship a single monolithic package, or whether you can break it up.

> We've learned on the Azure SDK team that it generally works best if you start with the end-developer in mind and figure out how to optimize the consumption experience and then balance that against other considerations such as inner-loop developer efficiency, engineering system complexity and supporability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We've learned on the Azure SDK team that it generally works best if you start with the end-developer in mind and figure out how to optimize the consumption experience and then balance that against other considerations such as inner-loop developer efficiency, engineering system complexity and supportability.
```

> We've learned on the Azure SDK team that it generally works best if you start with the end-developer in mind and figure out how to optimize the consumption experience and then balance that against other considerations such as inner-loop developer efficiency, engineering system complexity and supportability.

Reviewer: You can include statements this in the blog intro as well.

Author: Not quite sure what you mean?

Reviewer: What I mean is this is a good summary of the situation and challenges that would be a good fit in the intro of the post to draw the reader in.

Author: Moved, and added a shorter conclusion at the end.

> ## Notes

Reviewer: Why are these not integrated into the article?

> 1. Python also supports binary distribution in the form of wheel packages, and source distribution can also be directly from the version control system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Python also supports binary distribution in the form of wheel packages, and source distribution can come directly from the version control system.
```

The general approach that these package managers take is that they allow you to express your dependencies and then the tooling takes care of pulling the appropriate version of the source and presenting it to your chosen build system for integration into your solution.

Source-based composition of dependencies is a common feature of ecosystems that produce native binaries where there tends to be less introspection capabilities at runtime.

## Repository as package

Language/platform designers today can't ignore the importance of having a simple and streamlined code reuse experience. It isn't surprising then when we look at languages like Swift and Go that they have made early efforts to formalize what it means to create reusable code.

The difference with these ecosystems when compared to .NET, Python, JavaScript, and Java is that they've opted to strongly tie the definition of a package to the source repository that hosts it.

* Swift Package Manager looks for a ```Package.swift``` file in the root of a Git repository and versions a targetted by Git ref.

> ![Swift Package Structure](/images/posts/swift-package-structure.PNG)

Reviewer: For me, the image appears to be the same as the Go one.

Author: Fixed.

Language/platform designers today can't ignore the importance of having a simple and streamlined code reuse experience. It isn't surprising then when we look at languages like Swift and Go that they have made early efforts to formalize what it means to create reusable code.

> The difference with these ecosystems when compared to .NET, Python, JavaScript, and Java is that they've opted to strongly tie the definition of a package to the source repository that hosts it.

Reviewer: I suggest using the same ordering of langs every time you mention them.  This order is different than above.

> * Swift Package Manager looks for a ```Package.swift``` file in the root of a Git repository and versions a targetted by Git ref.

Reviewer: Do you mean "are targeted"?

For package managers this means understanding the relationship that package format, discovery, distribution and cardinality have on the way that you structure your repository and the surrounding build and release systems.

> The table below is my quick survey of some ecosystems and how they map to package format, discovery, distribution and cardinality (whether the one repo can host sources for multiple packages):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below is my quick survey of some ecosystems and how they map to package format, discovery, distribution, and cardinality (whether the one repo can host sources for multiple packages):
```
